# MCVCM: A Python Program for Multi-Catalogue Visual Cross-Matching

## Foreword

This software was initially designed and coded to
facilitate the cross-matching of the ATLAS 1.4 GHz radio source
catalogue with DES photometric source catalogue. Initially, this
cross-matching was performed directly between the radio data and optical
i-band (e.g., ) and was later adapted to work with SWIRE
3.6um infrared (achieving a more reliable cross-match). 
During the necessary modifications to facilitate this,
I endeavoured to make this tool generalised and adaptable enough to be
usable with any catalogue pairings. 

Edits by svw26: I edited this code for cross-identifying the GLEAM 4-Jy Sample (https://github.com/svw26/G4Jy), and now am adapting it for cross-matching MIGHTEE data over the COSMOS field. My edits allow the software to: 
* run on pre-made cut-outs (rather than large mosaic .fits images),
* display the ID name in the interactive window,
* calculate the rms of the radio data on-the-fly, using a method courtesy of Tom Mauch (SARAO).
However, other parts of the MCVCM code have been updated by Jesse in the meantime, so I'm just uploading what works for me on my local machine at the moment (30/4/19).


## Description

MCVCM (Multi-Catalogue Visual Cross-Matching) is written in and is
designed to facilitate the visual-manual cross-matching of two
catalogues provided by the user.

## Cutout Assembly

When MCVCM is first run, the cutout generator creates a memory mapping
of the mosaicked radio continuum, radio RMS and infrared images provided
by the user. As the user iterates through catalogue sources in MCVCM
sources, a slice of these images centred about the target source is
retrieved for the generation of each cutout. Using this memory-mapping
technique, the requisite data can be retrieved fast enough that the
images need not be stored entirely in computer random access memory.
Using a combination of utilities and the affiliated tool, the radio data
is re-sampled (via interpolation) to match the resolution and
orientation of the infrared image. These data are then overlaid and
displayed to the user using the and plotting utilities. User
interactivity is established with a combination of listeners and ’s
standard graphical user interface package .

### Radio Contour Levels

MCVCM accepts a continuum map, as well as an RMS map for each of the
fields being cross-matched. Using the sliced region of these data (about
the source to be cross-matched) radio contours are calculated as
\(2^n \times \langle\text{RMS}\rangle\) for this slice and overlaid onto
the infrared image, this method allows for consistent contours
throughout the radio field. I have not established a reliable means for
drawing consistent contours when a complimentary RMS map is unavailable,
but I will incorporate this in future iterations of MCVCM.

## User Interaction

The script is designed to be called from within the folder containing in
the following manner:  

``` 

>> MCVCM.py {CDFS,ELAIS,Field3} [-h] [-v] [-t] [-x] [-d] [--savefigs {png,eps,pdf}]
```

  
MCVCM requires the user to specify the field that they will be
cross-matching as a positional argument (in this example either ‘CDFS’,
‘ELAIS’, or ‘Field3’). These field options are automatically generated
from the file once edited by the user.  

``` 

positional arguments:
  {CDFS,ELAIS,Field3}   Specify if we are working on CDFS, ELAIS, or Field3

optional arguments:
  -h, --help            show this help message and exit
  -v                    toggles verbose output
  -t                    toggles output of function timings 
                        (requires verbose mode)
  -x                    if specified, MCVCM processes only sources 
                          previously skipped by the user 
  --savefigs {png,eps,pdf}
                        if provided with an extension, saves final 
                        cross-matched source cutout to that format 
                        inside ./MCVCM-figs/ (e.g. --savefigs png)
```

### Configuration

Three configurations are needed once MCVCM has been installed to begin
cross-matching of data. The first step is editing the file within the
main directory to specify the paths to the required data files. The
specified data files can exist anywhere on the user’s machine (so long
as the full file-path is provided) and are opened as read-only. The
following is an example of the configuration file used for the
cross-matching of the ATLAS radio sources with SWIRE infrared, CDFS and
ELAIS are the two ATLAS fields, and Field3 is an example. This
configuration file can contain unlimited field-data structures.  

``` 

<./path_config.json>
{
  "ELAIS": {
    "radio_continuum": "data/ELAIS/ELAISmosaic_allch_8March2015.fits",
    "radio_rms": "data/ELAIS/ELAISmosaic_allch_noise_8March2015.fits",
    "image_mosaic": "data/ELAIS/elais_mosaic.fits",
    "radio_catalog": "data/ELAIS/ATLASDR3_ELAIScmpcat_23July2015.dat",
    "infrared_catalog": "data/ELAIS/SWIRE_ELAISS1-FALL05.fits"
  },
  "CDFS": {
    "radio_continuum": "data/CDFS/CDFSmosaic_allch_8March2015.fits",
    "radio_rms": "data/CDFS/CDFSmosaic_allch_noise_8March2015.fits",
    "image_mosaic": "data/CDFS/cdfs_mosaic.fits",
    "radio_catalog": "data/CDFS/ATLASDR3_CDFScmpcat_23July2015.dat",
    "infrared_catalog": "data/CDFS/SWIRE-CDFS-FALL05.fits"
  }
  "Field3": {
    "radio_continuum": "path/to/continuum_map.fits",
    "radio_rms": "path/to/rms_map.fits",
    "image_mosaic": "path/to/image_mosaic.fits",
    "radio_catalog": "path/to/primary(radio)_source_catalogue.fits",
    "infrared_catalog": "path/to/secondary(infrared)_catalogue.fits"
  }
}
```

The second configuration provides information to MCVCM that allows it to
read the correct columns from the source catalogues for source positions
and identifications, the size (in image pixels) to be rendered from the
image files, and two user-configuration options: the start-index
(counting from 0, which row to start cross-matching from) and the figure
position (this will be the position of the MCVCM cross-matching window
on the users screen - (0,0) is top-left). The third configuration is
adjusting the scaling of the infrared image for standardised source
visibility.  

``` 

<./parameter_config.json>
{
  "column_names": {
    "radio_ra": "RA_deg",
    "radio_dec": "Dec_deg",
    "radio_id": "ID",
    "infrared_ra": "ra",
    "infrared_dec": "dec",
    "infrared_id": "object"
  },
  "cutout_pixels": {
    "radio": 95,
    "infrared": 170
  },
  "start_index": 0,
  "figure_position": {
    "horizontal": 0,
    "vertical": 0
  }
  "image_scaling": {
    "max_saturation": 1.5,
    "power_normalise": 0.7
  }
}
```

### Calibrating Image

Calibration of the infrared image is done via a utility packaged with
MCVCM. Once and are established by the user, the calibration script
produces an MCVCM cutout with two variable sliders that adjust the
normalisation factor, and maximum saturation threshold for the image
scaling. When satisfied the user can enter the displayed numbers into
the , and fields of .

### Cross-Matching

Once the MCVCM instance is created, the catalogue cross-matching is
split into three phases:

1.  **Infrared Host Selection**: The user is presented with a cutout
    image of the infrared postage stamp with radio contours overlaid
    (e.g., \(a\)). Infrared catalogue source positions are marked as
    small crosses that the user can select by clicking with the mouse.
    In this phase the user may only make one selection, this will be
    marked with a large hollow black cross-hair that is retained through
    the remaining phases (\(d\)). If a mistake is made, the user can
    reset by pressing ‘’.

2.  **Radio Core Selection**: The image remains the same, with the
    cross-hair marking the location of the selected infrared host still
    visible, and the infrared catalogue source positions are replaced
    with the radio component peak positions (\(d\)). The user can now
    select one of these sources as the radio core if there is no viable
    core this phase can be skipped.

3.  **Radio Component Selection**: The image will remain the same as
    Phase 2 with a slight change to the radio component marker style to
    notify the user of the new phase (\(e\)). The user can now select
    any number of radio components that are associated with this
    cross-identification (\(f\)).

At any time during the cross-matching, the user may press one of the
following keys or key combinations for the associated effect.

``` 

  - {h}  Print this help list
  - {r}  Reset current progress of source cross-matching and 
         re-draw starting at Phase One
  - {b}  Increase the displayed area of the cutout by 33% 
         (this will reset current source progress)
  - {t}  toggle on and off the marked catalogue source positions
  - {s}  Save an automatically named cutout of the current figure 
         state to ./MCVCM-figs/
  - {i}  Print information on current source from the radio 
         source catalogue
  - {j}  Print the last 25 rows of the cross-match catalogue being 
         assembled in ./MCVCM-tables/ 
  - {c}  Open a dialogue box for the user to enter a comment for 
         the current source. This comment is saved in the final 
         table under the column 'MCVCM_comment'
  - {1, 2, 3, 4}  provide an integer confidence flag for the 
                  cross-matching of this source
  - {shift + x}  Skip cross-matching of the current source, skipped 
                 sources can be cross-matched at any time by starting 
                 the script with the '-x' flag
  - {shift + q}  Safely close the MCVCM instance 
```

  
Each phase is completed when the user presses ‘’, and the cross-matching
of a particular source is finished when the user presses ‘’ or ‘’,
provided that at least one radio component has been selected. If no
infrared core was selected in Phase one, then the cross-identification
is given a ‘’ in place of the infrared source ID. If no core is
selected, then the component ‘’ is used as the core for catalogue
management. After cross-matching a unique association string is
generated for each of the selected radio sources according to the
following:

    <infrared ID>*<radio core ID>*m<number of components>*C<component number>

For example:

    Infrared host: SWIRE3_J003940.76-432549*EI1896*m3
    Radio host:    SWIRE3_J003940.76-432549*EI1896*m3*C0
    Component #1:  SWIRE3_J003940.76-432549*EI1896*m3*C1
    Component #2:  SWIRE3_J003940.76-432549*EI1896*m3*C2

  
Note: Once a source is cross-matched it will be skipped by the MCVCM
source incrementation, but it is not write-protected. During
cross-matching, the MCVCM cutout will centre on the lowest-indexed radio
component without a cross-match (skipping sources that were
force-skipped by the user via ‘’). If during the cross-matching of this
new source, the user deliberately or accidentally cross-matches a source
other than the one that the catalogue is centred on, that cross-match is
correctly stored in the cross-match catalogue (even if it was previously
cross-matched). Once this cross-matching is complete MCVCM will again
load the lowest indexed radio-source without a cross-match. This does
allow the user to correct any radio-component mis-associations that they
might have made earlier but it also allows for the possibility of
erroneously altering an earlier cross-match.

### Saving A Figure

The saving of a figure can either be done manually or automatically. If
MCVCM is started with the flag then the final cross-matched image will
be saved upon completion. This can take up to one second per source and
is not recommended. The final version of MCVCM will include an option to
iteratively generate these image cutouts once the entire catalogue has
been cross-matched. Individual figures can be saved manually by the user
either via the save icon in the MCVCM window (the user will need to
specify file name and location) or by pressing the ‘’ key at any point
during the cross-matching of the source.

## Version Control

The master catalogue which MCVCM is appending to as cross-matches are
made is located at , there will be separate files for each being
cross-matched. Each time MCVCM is resumed from the terminal, a copy of
this file is made with an incremented numerical suffix. These act as
back-ups of the cross-matching at the state when the MCVCM instance was
launched. At any point, the user can revert to one of these states by
following the ‘Rolling Back’ procedure.

### Rolling Back

Rolling-back to a previous state of the cross-matched catalogue
currently requires manual file management by the user, in the future
this will be handled by MCVCM. To roll-back to a previous state locate
the desired version (e.g., ) and replace the master file () with this
version. It is a good idea to make a backup of both files in case of a
mistake.

## Catalogue Management

Once the cross-matching has been performed, a separate script needs to
be run if the user wishes to create an amalgamated catalogue. Due to the
vast differences in catalogue formats and conventions (for example, the
filling of missing values), MCVCM does not include a generalised means
of performing this merging. Upon request, I am happy to provide
assistance in constructing this tool or provide the example used for the
handling of the ATLAS data for reference.

## Continuing Development

Future work will see MCVCM handling as many complimentary data sets as
the user desires, including the ability to over-lay multi-frequency
radio contours and switch between (for example) infrared, optical and
x-ray images on the fly. Supporting software will be developed to allow
more robust version control and automated restoration, and final
cross-matched catalogue assembly. MCVCM will continue to be developed
along-side the users so that the user interface, user experience, and
scientific utility are improved.
